there are people who have spent literal
decades trying to get better at
character animation so you can spend
that much time if you want to I don't
want that but a lot of the hard work has
been done already and now there are
tools workflows and resources that will
help you achieve your goals much faster
[Music]
in order to start animating characters
fast you're gonna need a rigged
character now you can make these
yourself but we're in a hurry so the
first option is miximo Which is popular
so you might have already heard of it it
has a lot of free characters to choose
from that are already rigged and you can
even choose from their library of
animations it basically removes all of
the work and just does the animation for
you you can also upload your own
character model and it will
automatically rig it for you so that you
can use their animations it can work
really well but it's very automatic so
there is a chance that your model won't
deform as you expect it to if you want
to animate one of their characters
manually you might have a hard time
because miximo doesn't make any rig
controls for you by default it just
gives you the bones that are needed to
make it deform if you want to use this
rig then you can try using this auto ik
option which could help you pose the
model more easily just turn it on select
a bone press G to move it and then you
can use the scroll wheel to change the
chain length for different results Auto
ik is nice but it's not going to be as
good as a rig that actually has luckily
there is a free miximo add-on that will
take any rigged model from miximo and
generate a bunch of controls to make it
easier to use so definitely use this if
you plan on doing manual animation for a
simple rigged character you can download
one that I made from gumroad it'll be
easier to control than the one from
miximo but it doesn't have any face
controls so it's only good for body
animation for rigs with all of the
controls you could ever want check out
the free characters from blender Studio
these are the same ones they use in
their short movies like this one has
fine-tuned controls for the face stretch
controllers to make things cartoony and
even has a pose library and if you use
these make sure to check the bone layers
in the side panel to see all of the
options they give you there are plenty
of other free rigged characters but I'd
basically just be doing Google searches
at this point so let's move on to
actually animating again the first
method is a little more automatic and
that is by getting motion capture
animations or by doing motion capture
yourself the animations from miximo are
motion capture data but a quick search
for free mocap animations reveals that
you can find this stuff all over the
place you can also do your own motion
capture for free with Rococo video all
you have to do is film a video of
yourself doing the performance you want
to capture then you upload it to their
website and use their application to
clean things up and Export them and if
you use the Rococo add-on for blender
then you can retarget the animations to
work with whatever rig you want to use
using this free method isn't going to be
as clean as having a motion capture suit
like you have to be careful about
whether your arms and legs can be seen
clearly but for a free option this is
super valuable I personally haven't done
much motion capture but I tried this and
it was pretty easy to figure out without
looking anything up next we should talk
about animating manually so here are
some posing and keyframing tips and
don't worry I'll talk about more
automatic Solutions later on basic
posing is very simple go into pose mode
by selecting an Armature and changing
this to pose mode or by pressing Ctrl
tab then you can select a bone and press
gr or s to move rotate and scale for
trackball rotation you can press r twice
you can also transform Bones on specific
axes for example you can move a bone on
the x-axis by pressing G and then X or
you could rotate a bone on the local
y-axis by pressing R and then y twice
you'll end up using local axes a lot
while posing so you can also change the
default up here if you like I already
mentioned the auto ik option but we can
also turn on pose mirroring up here and
it should work as long as the bones are
named properly which is likely if you
downloaded the rig I talk more about
this in my rigging video if you're
interested in learning more if you want
to make long chains of Bones curl try
changing the pivot point to individual
Origins by pressing period or by using
this drop down then select the bones you
want and start rotating this is really
useful for controlling fingers Tails or
any other chain of bones with a bone
selected you can press I to insert a
keyframe and then you can choose between
location rotation and scale or for a
combination of the three you should see
keyframes on your timeline now move to a
different point on your timeline and
press I to insert another keyframe press
the space bar to play and
congratulations now you're an animator
now this
back to posing you can copy a pose by
selecting bones and pressing Ctrl C
paste it with Ctrl V and flip the pose
with Ctrl shift V and this also works
for keyframes on the timeline as long as
you have the bones and the keyframes
selected we have the breakdowner tool
that lets you blend between different
poses on the timeline as well as push
and relax if you click and hold the tool
button last is the motion paths option
which can be found under object data
properties just select some bones and
press calculate and it will show where
those bones move over time just know
that it won't update in real time as you
place keyframes and you'll have to press
the update path button to see the
changes you can also quickly jump
between visible keyframes with the up
and down arrow keys your timeline will
get messy really fast so you can drag
this Arrow to see all of the bones
individually but for maximum control you
should be using the dope sheet in the
graph editor let's make a new window and
change this to the dope sheet now you
can see we have a few of other menus
here this bus button this button makes
it so you can see all of the keyframes
without having the bone selected and
there are a ton of options in the key
menu that you should explore but they'll
make a lot more sense in the graph
editor and we can get there by hovering
over the dope sheet or the timeline and
pressing Ctrl tab the graph editor can
be overwhelming so here are a few tips
that will instantly make it easier to
use click and drag to box select and you
can frame the selected points with
period on the number pad or by pressing
the back tick key this normalize option
will display everything to have a value
of negative one to one which can make it
easier to look at sometimes you can hide
channels by selecting them over here and
pressing H or the little eyeball you can
isolate them by pressing shift H and you
can bring everything back with alt H
also if you press n you can add
modifiers to the curves like noise to
make it more random or cycle for when
you want a motion to repeat so under the
key menu we have interpolation mode
which you can also get to by pressing t
and this has some useful curve shapes
you can play with everything uses bezier
curves by default but you should look at
all of the other ones like this one
called back that overshoots the endpoint
by just a little and if you want to and
if you want to if you want to flip the
interpolation Direction you can change
the easing type with control E I like
setting it to ease in and out and using
these interpolation shapes in the middle
and for when you want very specific
curve shapes use a bezier interpolation
and you can change the handle types with
v then move rotate or scale the handles
back in the dope sheet we also have the
action editor which will let you save
animations you can rename them and click
the shield icon to save them and you can
create a new one by clicking this which
will duplicate what you have currently
or press the X and click new for an
empty action this is nice for when you
want to save animations to reuse them
like walk cycles and gestures this is
also really useful for when you start
using the nla editor which will let you
add these actions together and layer
them on top of each other but that's a
topic for a longer video the next option
is auto keying which is the most fun
method in my opinion all you have to do
is press this button and now whenever
you move rotate or scale a keyframe will
automatically be placed and this means
that you can press the space bar and
move your Armature to record the
movement in real time you might be
watching this thinking that this feature
is just a gimmick well it kind of is and
I love it because it feels like playing
with toys and the results are always
hilarious there are some quirks to
mention though like if you try to use
this on top of other keyframes it will
look pretty glitchy so I try to avoid
that but there are a few ways around it
one way is with keying sets on the
timeline there's this keying drop down
which lets you choose what channels you
want to keyframe and then you can use
this Arrow to make Auto keying only
place keyframes on those channels this
should let you record things like
location and rotation separately this
also means that when you press I to
insert a keyframe it will automatically
insert it to whatever you had selected
as your keying set to do layered Auto
keying you can also mute Channels with
these check boxes and you can lock
Channels with the lock icon and to
smooth out rough motion you can go to
the graph editor select some points and
press alt o and that will smooth those
curves out if you look closely you'll
notice I actually used auto keying in a
lot of my videos and I'm pretty sure
other popular animations on YouTube use
similar methods if you want to save
poses to reuse later you can use the
pose Library first make sure you're in
pose mode and select the bones that are
part of the pose then you can press F3
and search for create pose asset if you
open up the N side panel and go to the
animation tab you should see the pose it
created for you and if you have two or
more poses you can click and drag them
to blend between them you can also add
poses from the assat browser under the
asset menu and rename them in the N side
panel over here poses are saved as
actions so if you want to edit a pose
you can do that from the action editor
next is about a free add-on that I love
called Wiggle Bones 2 and it uses
physics to add some secondary motion to
your movements it's very easy to use and
the link is down below after installing
it go into pose mode and select the bone
that you want to wiggle press n to open
the side panel go to animation and you
can turn it on there adding it to the
Bone head will make it move from the
base of the bone and tail will move the
tip of the bone and make it rotate a
little more you can preview the motion
by pressing the space bar and moving the
Armature around and if you really wanted
to you could keyframe all of this motion
manually but this just makes it so much
easier it has quite a few options like
if you turn the stiffness down things
will move a lot more and you can also
add collision by selecting an object or
a collection if you like what it adds to
your animation and you want to render it
out you have to bake it first and you
can do that with the bake action button
at the very bottom this will turn all of
the motion you see into keyframes
another way that I like to do it is by
going to the action editor and saving
the current action and then and
duplicating it then press F3 and search
for bake action select visual keying
overwrite current action and press ok
now since you duplicated the action
you'll have one with the wiggle baked in
and one that is unaltered in case you
want to change it later the next tips
are more about workflow and should help
you tackle animating pretty much
anything first is to look into animation
principles which will help you
understand what makes motion look
natural like squash and stretch
anticipation and secondary action next
is video reference if you watch behind
the scenes content from an animated
movie you're likely to see animators
recording themselves and referencing
that as they animate the way I like to
bring references into blender is
literally just by dragging them in like
this now you should be able to scrub
through the timeline and see the video
move as you animate if you want to
change the frame range or edit the start
Point select the image and go to object
data properties and you'll see all of
those options right here if you're ever
struggling to animate something
definitely try recording some video
reference an animation workflow that is
very common is called pose to pose this
means focusing on the big recognizable
key poses first and then later you can
go back and fill in the space between
them this can help you figure out the
timing of your animation before making
it really complex and this style isn't
for everyone so if you don't like it you
can check out other approaches like
focusing on individual sections of the
body and layering them up one by one I
put a video about that in the
description one thing that has helped me
a lot is by watching videos that aren't
about blender whether it's about Maya
Cinema 4D or even 2D animation a lot of
the concepts and principles will still
be useful so don't limit Yourself by
only searching for blender resources and
if you're serious about getting better
then the best thing you can do is
practice I know this video is meant to
be for impatient people which is why I
talked about automatic approaches first
but you have to understand that progress
takes time and if you practice smarter
not harder then it won't take you
decades to become proficient and knowing
about all of the concepts from this
video will help you level up faster if
you have any other character animation
tips to share make sure to leave a
comment and one more tip if you're
really impatient you can also just get
someone to animate for you